---
title: "Parece que están dejando de reirse..."
authors: [admin]
date: 2005-08-22T18:25:11-03:00
slug: "parece-que-estan-dejando-de-reirse"
tags: ["ciencia", "tecnología"]
draft: false
---

> The Space Elevator will be built about 50 years after everyone stops
laughing. (El elevador espacial se construirá 50 años despues que
todos dejen de reirse) -- Arthur Clarke

[Fernando Flores](http://www.fernandoflores.cl/node/601) escribe sobre
el elevador espacial, citando como autor de la idea a Arthur Clarke, en
realidad la cosa es tan antigua, que ya en 1895, 
[Konstantin Tsiolkovsky](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Konstantin_Tsiolkovsky),
escribió al respecto.

Es más, el genio ruso fue llegó a plantear que para la humanidad escapar
de la tierra es una necesidad de sobrevivencia, famosa es su frase:

La tierra es la cuna de la humanidad, pero uno no puede quedarse en la
cuna toda la vida.


Sobre las ideas de Tsiolkovsky, leer: [Spaceflight or
Extinction](http://www.spaext.com/info/tsiolkovsky/index.html).

La cita de Clarke es de su famoso paper [THE SPACE ELEVATOR: 'THOUGHT\
EXPERIMENT', OR KEY TO THE\
UNIVERSE?](http://www.islandone.org/LEOBiblio/CLARK3.HTM) de 1981.

Otra interesante novela, contemporanea a las fuentes del paraiso, es
"La Telaraña de los mundos", del escritor y científico [Charles
Sheffield](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Sheffield).

Sheffield y Clarke notaron que habían escrito sobre el mismo tema, y en
un acuerdo de caballeros, decidieron publicarlas con poca distancia
temporal)

Comentarios de Tsiolkovsky:

Humankind must colonize the solar system to survive\
Man must at all costs overcome the Earth's gravity and have, in
reserve, the space at least of the Solar System.

All kinds of danger lie in wait for him on the Earth. We do not mean the
difficulties we all daily experience: mankind will soon do away with
these. We are talking of disasters that can destroy the whole of mankind
or a large part of it.

-- Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, "The Aims of Astronautics," trans. X. Danko,
in The Call of the Cosmos, ed. V. Dutt (Moscow: Foreign Languages
Publishing House, 1960?), 370.

Impacts from space may cause the extinction of humankind\
For instance, a cloud of bolides, or a small planet a few dozen
kilometres in diameter, could fall on the Earth, with such an impact
that the solid, liquid or gaseous blast produced by it could wipe off
the face of the Earth all traces of man and his buildings. The rise of
temperature accompanying it could alone scorch or kill all living
beings.

-- Ibid., 371.

Humankind should go into the cosmos to avoid the dangers of confinement
on Earth\
Numerous other terrible dangers await mankind on the Earth, all of which
suggest that man should look for a way into the Cosmos.

We have said a great deal about the advantages of migration into space,
but not all can be said or even imagined.

-- Ibid., 372.

Copia del Paper Original de Clarke

THE SPACE ELEVATOR: 'THOUGHT\
EXPERIMENT', OR KEY TO THE\
UNIVERSE?

by ARTHUR C. CLARKE

Chancellor, University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka

-- Fellow of King's College, London.

DEPLOYING THE CABLE

The space elevator may be regarded as a kind of bridge, and many bridges
begin with the establishment of a light initial cable \-- sometimes,
indeed, no more than a string towed across a canyon by a kite. It seems
likely that the space elevator will start in the same way with the
laying of a cable between geo stationary orbit and the point on the
equator immediately below.

This operation is not as simple as it sounds, because of the varying
forces and velocities involved, not to mention the matter of air
resistance after atmospheric entry. But there are two existing
technologies which may provide a few answers, or at least hints at them.

The first is that of submarine cable laying, now considerably more than
a century old. Perhaps one day we may see in space something analogous
to the triumphs and disasters of the Great Eastern, which laid the first
successful transatlantic telegraph cable \-- the Apollo Project of its
age.

But a much closer parallel, both in time and sophistication, lies in the
development of wire-guided missiles. These lethal insects can spin out
their metallic gossamer at several hundred kilometres an hour. They may
provide the prototype of the vehicle that lays a thread from stationary
orbit down to earth.

Imagine a spool, or bobbin, carrying some 40000 km of filament, a few
tenths of a millimetre thick at the outer layers, and tapering down to a
tenth of this at the core \-- the end that finally reaches Earth. Its
mass would be a few tons, and the problem would be to play it out evenly
at an average velocity of a kilometre a second along the desired
trajectory. Moreover, an equivalent mass has to be sent outwards at the
same time, to ensure that the system remains in balance at the
stationary orbit.

My friend Professor Ruppehas investigated \[12\] the dynamics of the
mission, and concludes that it can be achieved with modest mass-ratios.
But the mechanical difficulties would obviously be formidable, and it
may well turn out that material of such tensile strength is too stiff to
be wound on to a spool of reasonable radius.

Sheffield \[18\] has suggested an alternative method of installation
which I find \-- to say the least \-- hair raisingly implausible. He
proposes constructing the entire space elevator system in orbit, and
then launching it towards the earth, grabbing the lower end when it
reaches the equator! The atmospheric entry of a few megatons dead
weight, which must impact within metres of the aiming point, seems
likely to generate a lot of opposition from the environmentalists. I
call it 'harpooning the Earth', and would prefer not to be near one of
the Poles if it's ever tried out.

THE MASS ANCHOR

In order to balance the weight of the lower portion, and to compensate
for the reaction produced by ascending payloads, the space elevator has
to extend far beyond geostationary orbit. The upper portion may be
regarded as the mass which keeps the cosmic sling taut, as it whirls
round the Earth every 24 h.

This mass could be provided by another tapered cable, extending out into
space, but it has to be very much longer than the lower portion to
produce equilibrium. Indeed, calculations show that it must reach the
enormous height of 144,000 km. I do not think that a cosmic flail
extending a third of the way to the moon will make the Earth a nice
place to visit.

The alternative is to have a large mass anchored at a much lower
altitude, not far above the geostationary orbit. The closer it is, the
larger the mass required; it might be many megatons, or even gigatons.
Both Sheffield and I have suggested that captured asteroids could be
used for this purpose, and as many of them now appear to be largely
carbonaceous they could also supply much of the material of the
elevator, the remaining debris providing the anchor.

CATASTROPHES

A structure extending right through the atmosphere and on into space for
at least 50000 km would be a considerable navigational hazard, both to
aircraft and spacecraft. Very elaborate anti-collision measures would
have to be taken and all air traffic would have to be diverted from the
equatorial danger zone. Probably the structure would be strong enough to
survive impacts at atmospheric velocities; cosmic speeds would be
another matter.

The problem here is aggravated by the fact that, over a long enough
period of time, all satellites with perigees below geostationary
altitude would eventually collide with the space elevator, as their
orbits precess around the earth. So before the elevator is built, there
would have to be a thorough job of garbage collection, and thereafter
all remaining satellites would have to be closely watched. Whenever they
approached too near the elevator, they would have to be nudged into a
safer orbit. The impulses required would be trivial, and need be applied
only very infrequently.

Meteorites present a more difficult problem, since they would not be
predictable. But the impact of a large one would be a very rare
occurrence indeed, and the elevator would have to be designed with
enough redundancy to withstand any reasonable danger. Thus if it was in
the form of an open framework \-- like a boxgirder \-- a meteorite
should be able to pass through it in any direction without causing a
structural failure.

But\
what if the elevator is severed? \-- Well, if the elevator is cut
through at the Earth's surface, it would de exactly the opposite of a
terrestrial building. It wouldn't fall down \-- but would rise up into
the sky! In theory, the loose end might be secured and fastened down
again; but that would be, to say the least, a tricky operation. It might
even be easier to build a new system\....

If the break occurred at any altitude up to about 25000 km, the lower
portion of the elevator would descend to Earth and drape itself along
the equator while the now unbalanced upper portion would rise to a
higher orbit.

Hopefully, such major catastrophes can be avoided by good design; after
all, it is very rare indeed for a modern bridge to collapse. (Though it
has happened!) Much more likely \-- indeed, inevitable \-- is that
objects would accidentally fall off the elevator. Their subsequent fate
would depend upon their initial altitude

The situation here is totally different from that encountered in orbital
flight. If you step outside a Spacecraft, you stay with it. But if you
step off the elevator' it's rather like jumping out the window on the
thousandth \-- or ten thousandth \-- floor of a rather tall skyscraper.
Even so, you might still be quite safe because you wouldn't fall
vertically. You would share the structure's horizontal velocity as it
whirls round with the spinning Earth; in other words, you would be
injected into an elliptical orbit.

If your initial height is less than 23000km, too bad. Your orbit will
intersect the atmosphere in a few hours \-- or even minutes - - and
you'll burn up on the other side of the planet. Above this critical
altitude, you would be in a stable orbit, skimming the atmosphere and
coming back, after one revolution, to the place you started from. Of
course, by then the elevator would be somewhere else, but with luck your
friends might be waiting for you with a net and some well-chosen words
of advice. Or if not on thisrevolution, on a subsequent one\....

If you stepped off at the geostationary altitude itself, here, and only
here, you would remain with the elevator, just as in conventional
orbital flight. At higher altitudes, you would be injected into orbits
of increasing eccentricity, with periods of one day and upwards.

That is, until you reached another critical altitude \-- 47000 km. At
this point, you'd be slung off into space at more than the local escape
velocity, and would never return. You would become an independent planet
of the Sun, and it might not be possible, owing to budgetary
considerations, to rescue you and bring you back to Earth.

The analogy with a sling is now complete. Payloads released anywhere
above the 47000 km altitude would escape from the Earth's gravitational
field, and by going to greater and greater altitudes any desired launch
speed could be attained. Pearson \[9\] has shown that all the planets
can be reached by this technique, without the use of any other
propulsion. The energy comes, of course, from the rotation of the Earth.

BEYOND THE EARTH

The lower the gravitational field of a planet, and the quicker its speed
of rotation, the easier it is to build a space elevator. On a small
asteroid the feat would be absurdly simple, and could even be achieved
by a free-standing tower. There would be no need for suspended cables
made of exotic materials.

Pearson \[9\] has pointed out the advantages of lunarSpace elevators \--
in this case, linking the Moon's equator with the well-known Lagrangian
points in the line joining Earth and Moon. He calls them 'anchored
lunar satellites', and they could be constructed of materials already
available. Working in conjunction with the earth-based elevator, they
would permit two-way traffic between Earth and Moon with almost zero use
of rocket propellants.

 The planet which seems ideally suited for the space elevator is Mars,
with only one third of Earth's gravity. What is more, the outer
satellite Deimos is only slightly above stationary orbit \-- in just the
right position to provide a mass anchor! Moreover, it appears to be
largely carbonaceous, so could supply the required construction
material.

But there is one big problem \-- about ten million million tons \-- in
connection with the Mars elevator, and that's the inner moon, Phobos.
Moving almost exactly in the equatorial plane, it would slice through
the elevator at very frequent intervals. Phobosis much too big to tow
away, and blowing it up would only make matters worse. I refer you to
The Fountains of Paradise for one solution\....

DYNAMIC SYSTEMS

A daring extension of the space elevator principle has been put forward
by Hans Moravec of Stanford University \[17\]. He imagines a'skyhook'
which is at a very low altitude, and is therefore not stationary with
respect to the earth, but orbiting around it.

Consider a very elongated satellite in a two hour orbit, rotating like a
propeller blade (remember them?) as it rolls around the equator. The
blades are just long enough to touch the earth, and if everything is
properly synchronized, the tips would always touch the samespots on the
equator at regular intervals.

From the point of view of the earth it would be, as Dr. Robert Forward
has put it, 'a Jacob's Ladder coming down out of the sky, pausing for
a moment, then lifting off again at 1.4 g'. One could grab hold of the
end, and get a free lift into space \-- and of course come back the same
way.

It's a delightful concept, but the presence of the atmosphere, not to
mention the fact that the equator isn't a perfect circle, and a few
other practical details, make it rather unlikely. However, something
similar may be possible in space, because very large rotation systems
might serve as 'velocity banks' an idea discussed by Pearson and
Sheffield \[9,15\].

If you could hook on to the edge of a spinning disc \-- or an asteroid
with a long extension from its equator \-- you could let go again at the
appropriate point and so obtain a major velocity change without using
any propellant. However, we would need such an enormous number of these
'cosmic carousels' scattered round the solar system that the idea is
not really practical, except perhaps for very special applications.

I'd like to conclude this section on 'dynamic systems' by mentioning,
even more briefly, an idea that has just emerged from Japan \[19\]\_the
'Space Escalator'.

Imagine two satellites in circular orbits above the equator, one a few
hundred kilometres above the other. Each carries a launching mechanism
and a catching mechanism, which could be something as simple as a hook
and elastic cord. By means of this mechanism, payloads could be
transferred in either direction without the use of propellant. With a
whole series of satellites \-- about a hundred \-- you could hop, or
leap-frog, all the way up to the stationary orbit. But it would be a
computational and operational nightmare, keeping track of all the
constantly changing orbits, and launching and catching payloads at the
right time. I think I'll stick to the elevator, rather than take the
escalator.

POWER AND PROPULSION

The physics laboratories of British schools once boasted \-- and
probably still do \-- an instructive device known as Atwood's Machine.
I don't know what it's called elsewhere, and in any case Galileo was
first with something very similar. It's an almost frictionless pulley
over which runs a light cord, with equal weights suspended on either
side. In this state nothing happens, of course, but even a small
additional weight on one side sets the system in motion, at a very low
acceleration.

This device may be regarded as the mechanical analogue of the Space
Elevator. I don't suggest for a moment that we would actually use
moving cables to lower and raise our payloads, but it demonstrates the
basic principles involved. Such a system is inherently conservative \--
if it's properly balanced, it requires no energy to run it, except the
very small amount lost by friction. In principle, arbitrarly large
masses can be raised or lowered through any distance. Unlike the rocket,
which wastes precisely 100% of its available energy on a round trip,
Atwood's machine wastes only a few percent. And it's a lot quieter.

In practice, the space elevator would almost certainly be electrically
powered, and the energy generated by the returning payloads during the
braking and descent would be pumped back into the system \-- as happens
with electric railroads in mountainous country. But there is also
another reason why electric propulsion would be mandatory.

Though inanimate payloads might be in no hurry to reach the
geostationary orbit, 36000 km up, human passengers are easily bored and
have to be fed, entertained or at least tranquillised by alcohol and
inflight movies. By the time the space elevator is likely to be
operating, no journey on Earth will last more than a couple of hours. I
don't think that the average space tourist will tolerate a great deal
of time in what will be little more than a glorified elevator cage,
though one with a magnificient view.

So we will require operating speeds of several thousand kilometres an
hour, which can be provided only by some kind of electric propulsion
system withno mechanical contact \-- a linear motor, for example.

I am not competent to discuss the problems involved in switching huge
amounts of electric power over distances a hundred times greater than
those encountered in terrestrial systems. Presumably superconductors
will be available by the time the elevator is built, but the weight
penalty of the associated cooling systems may make them quite
impracticable. It would be marvellous, of course, if our superstrength
material was also a superconductor \-- and at room temperature (or
higher)! But to expect not merely one but three miracles simultaneously
is a little greedy.

Perhaps we can avoid enormously long transmission lines by using
microwave or laser beams to get the power where it is wanted. And if it
ever proves possible to build small nuclear generators, then perhaps we
can hang the power stations at strategic points along the elevator.

However, this suggests an even more attractive possibility. There is no
theoretical reason why small fusion \-- or even fission \-- generators
cannot be built. If they prove to be practicable, then we could forget
electrical transmission systems altogether and put the power plants in
the vehicles. This would not be a retrograde step, because the weight of
the 'fuel' would be essentially zero.

The space elevator could even make possible a far more efficient
chemically fuelled transport system. In this case, the Earth-orbit
structure would merely provide physical support \-- the railbed, as it
were, for theequivalent of a self-contained diesel locomotive, not a
centrally-powered electric one. Unlike a rocket, the space-train would
not have to use much of its fuel merely to maintain altitude; it could
do that simply by putting on the brakes. On the other hand, it would be
at a disadvantage over the rocket as it would have to lift some of its
propellants all the way to the stationary orbit. I have not calculated
at what particular specific impulse the chemical elevator will be more
efficient than the c\
hemical rocket.

SUBSIDIARY PROBLEMS

As is well known, satellites in the geostationary orbit will not
normally stay above the same point on the equator, but drift in
longitude owing to the fact that the Earth's gravitational field is not
symmetrical. However, there are two points of maximum stability \-- one
in the Pacific over the Galapagos, and the other above the Maldive
Islands, seven hundred kilometres to the southwest of Sri Lanka. The
latter point is the more stable; by an odd coincidence, it is directly
above the small island of Gan, which in the 1960s was one of the staging
posts for the Blue Streak rocket when it was being ferried from the
United Kingdom to the Woomera launching site. If orbital stability is
important, Gan \-- abandoned by the Royal Air Force several years ago,
to the great distress of its inhabitants, though not of the central
Maldivian government \-- may one day be the most important piece of real
estate on Earth.

Other orbital perturbations \-- including ones in the north-south
direction \-- are caused by the Sun and Moon. Probably all of these are
only important to free satellites, and will be insignificant in a
structure which is tethered to the ground. In any case, the upper
section of the elevator could \-- and probably would \-- sway through an
arc many thousands of kilometres across without causing operational
problems.

The effect of hurricanes on the lower portion of the structure has
worried some writers; although high winds are rare on the equator
itself, they can occur, and if they did nothing else they would generate
severe torsional vibrations which our revered colleague Dr. von Karman
studied in connection with the ill-fated Tacoma Narrows Bridge. So it
might be worthwhile siting the structure on a very high mountain to
reduce aerodynamic loads; unfortunately, there aren't any high
mountains near the stable points.

A RING AROUND THE WORLD

There are now scores of satellites in the geostationary orbit, and the
problem of collision and interference \-- which not long ago would have
seemed an absurd fantasy \-- is already of practical importance. What is
more, some equatorial countries are attempting to establish jurisdiction
over this large but still restricted narrow ring around our planet. This
has provoked the appalling pun, which perhaps fortunately cannot be
translated from English, that there should be another U.N. Committee \--
on the Useful Pieces of Outer Space

In 1977, while working on the final chapters of The Foundains of
Paradise, I had one of those sudden glimpsess of the perfectly obvious
out of which I have cunningly fashioned my reputation as a prophet. One
way of preventing geostationary satellites colliding or drifting around
the equator would be to link them together with cables. As the forces
involved would beextremely small, for the most purposes nothing much
stronger than a nylon fishing line would be adequate, and the total mass
needed to tie together all the satellites in the stationary orbit would
be negligible.

But why stop there? The next step would be to build a continuous,
habitable structure \-- a 'Ring City' \-- right around the Earth. All
the legions of geostationary satellites could be attached to it, and
reached for servicing by an internal circular railroad. And it could
serve as a launch platform for almost all missions, manned or unmanned,
into deep space.

It would be reached, of course, by space elevators, which would take the
form of several spokes linking the ring city with the equator. The Earth
would, in fact, now be the hub of a gigantic wheel, 85000 km in
diameter. Passengers could move up and down the spokes, or around the
rim, just as freely as they now move around the surface of the Earth.
The distinction between Earth and space would be abolished, though the
advantages of either could still be retained.

A Russian engineer, G. Polyakov had the same idea almost simultaneously,
and published a paper with the title 'A space necklace about the
Earth'[20](http://www.lnds.net/2005/08/parece_que_estan_dejando_de_re.html#fn20).
However, as I might have guessed, we were both anticipated by Professor
Buckminster Fuller. To quote from the notes he wrote for the sleeve of
my Fountains of Paradise recording (Caedmon TC 1606):

'In 1951, I designed a free floating tensegrity ring-bridge to be
installed way out from and around the Earth's equator. Within this halo
bridge, the Earth could continue its spinning while the circular bridge
would revolve at its own rate. I foresaw Earthian traffic vertically
ascending to the bridge, revolving and descending at preferred Earth
loci.'

All that Bucky's vision needs to make it reality is the space elevator

And when will we have that? I wouldn't like to hazard a guess, so I'll
adapt the reply that Arthur Kantrowitz gave, when someone asked a
similar question about his laser propulsion system

The Space Elevator will be built about 50 years after everyone stops
laughing.

Acknowledgements \-- My first thanks must go to the late A. V Cleaver,
F.B.I.S., F.R.Ae.S., with whom I discussed the subject of this paper for
several years. It is a great sorrow to many, besides myself, that he
never lived to see the final outcome of our deliberations.

I would also like to thank Professor Harry O. Ruppe, Dr. Charles
Sheffield, Dr. Robert Forward, Dr. Alan Bond, Frederick C. Durant, and
Jerome Pearson for much material and helpful correspondence.

Finally, I am especially grateful to Mr Vladimir Lvovfor giving me
biographical material on Yuri Artsutanov (Born 1929, Leningrad) and for
putting me in touch with him. Indeed, while this paper was in its final
draft I was delighted to receive a letter from Mr Artsutanov (dated
April 1979) of such interest and importance that it demands quoting at
length:

'It may be interesting for you to know how the idea of the space
elevator (s.e.) originated. At the beginning of 1957 a friend of mine,
who like myself graduated at the Leningrad Technological Institute.. .
told me about a material which could hold its weight at the length of
400km. I thought that at such a height the gravitating force is less and
consequently the length could be enlarged. Then it became interesting
for me to calculate the strength of the material to prolong the vertical
rod made of it to infinity\.... Immediately the thought came that this
rod should have a changeable section and it was easy to derive the
equation . .. which showed that the rod could be done out of any
material and its mass did not become absurdly large\....

'At first I told some of my friends about this idea. Some months later
the cosmic theme became very popular. In Summer 1960 I was in Moscow on
business and visited the editor of Komsomolskayu Pravda with a proposal
to publish my article without any equations. .. to my mind, they could
be derived by any student who understood the idea. A week later the
article was published under the title "Into space with the help of an
electric locomotive. . .";

'In 1969 the magazine Knowledge is Force (Znanije-Sila) No. 7, p. 25,
published my article developing the idea of the s.e. It was proposed to
sink the rods not from a synchronous satellite but from an ordinary one,
for example 1000km, height. In this case the contact with Earth and the
passing of denser layers of the atmosphere would take place at a
comparative low speed. The rods would be like spokes of a wheel rolling
along the equator\....Having attached itself to the end of such a rod
during a half-turn of this wheel the cosmic ship will gain the speed of
14 km/s. Similarly the ship returning from the cosmic space will lose
the speed and land during another half turn\....'

It will be seen that this proposal is virtually the same as that put
forward by Moravec 8 years later \[17\].

Until now, Yuri Artsutanov's work has only been published in simplified
form for the benefit of the lay public. Let us hope that it will soon
appear in its original version, so that his peers can fully appreciate
the full genius of this remarkable Leningrad engineer.

REFERENCES

\[1\] K. E. Tsiolkovski, Grezi o zemle i nene, p. 35.U.S.S.R. Academy of
Sciences edition (1959).

\[2\] Personal communication, Edward J. Hujsak to Fred CDurant, January
6 (1978).

\[3\] Arthur C. Clarke, The world of the communications satellite,
Astronautics, February (1964). Now inVoices From the Sky. Harper & Row,
N.Y. (1965); Gollancz London (1966).

\[4\] A. R. Collar and J. W. Flower, A (relatively) low altitude 24 hour
satellite, J.B.I.S. 22, 442-457,1969.

\[5\] John D. Isaacs, Allyn C. Vine, Hugh Bradner and George E. Bachus,
Satellite elongation into a true "Sky-Hook", Science 151, 682-683
(1966).

\[6\] James H. Shea, Sky-Hook. Reply by Isaacs et al.,Science 152, 800
(1966).

\[7\] Vladimir Lvov, Sky-Hook: old idea, Science 158, 946-947 (1967).

\[8\] J. Pearson, The orbital tower; a spacecraft launcher using the
Earth's rotational energy. Acta Astronautica 2, 785-799 (1975).

\[9\] J. Pearson, Using the orbital tower to launch Earth escape
payloads daily. AIAA Paper 7-123, 27th IAF Congress (1976); Anchored
lunar satellites for cislunar transportation and communication. J.
Astronaut. Sci. XXVII, No. 1, 39- 62 (1979). "Lunar Anchored Satellite
Test": AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Conference, Palo Alto, 7-9 August, 1978.

\[10\] Arthur C. Clarke, The Fountains of Paradise. Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, N.Y.; Gollancz, London (1979).
[11](http://www.lnds.net/2005/08/parece_que_estan_dejando_de_re.html#fn11)
These include G. C. Weiffenbach, G. Colombo, E. M. Gaposchkin and M. D.
Grossi, who arrived at the concept as a result of their work on tethered
satellites, and T. Logsdon and R. Africano \[see T. Logsdon, The Rush to
the Stars, Franklin (1970)\].
[12](http://www.lnds.net/2005/08/parece_que_estan_dejando_de_re.html#fn12)
Professor Harry O. Ruppe, Hyperfilament's First Strand. 15\
February (1979) (Personal Communication).\
[13](http://www.lnds.net/2005/08/parece_que_estan_dejando_de_re.html#fn13)
For a classic example, see my Profiles of the Future Chapt. 1. Harper &
Row, N.Y. (1973); Gollancz, London (1974).
[14](http://www.lnds.net/2005/08/parece_que_estan_dejando_de_re.html#fn14)
Willy Ley, Rockets, Missiles and Men In Space, Chap 5. Viking (1968).
[15](http://www.lnds.net/2005/08/parece_que_estan_dejando_de_re.html#fn15)
Charles Sheffield, How to Build a Beanstalk, in press
[16](http://www.lnds.net/2005/08/parece_que_estan_dejando_de_re.html#fn16)
NSF Press Release PR 79-15, 2 March, (1979).
[17](http://www.lnds.net/2005/08/parece_que_estan_dejando_de_re.html#fn17)
Hans Moravec, A non-synchronous orbital skyhook. J. Astronaut. Sci. XXV,
No. 4, 307-322 (1977).
[18](http://www.lnds.net/2005/08/parece_que_estan_dejando_de_re.html#fn18)
Charles Sheffield, The Web Between the Worlds. ACE (1979). Ll9\] Space
escalator, a quasi permanent engine in space. Tsuotomu Iwata, National
Space Development Agency of Japan. Application to the XXX IAC, 8 March
(1979).\
[20](http://www.lnds.net/2005/08/parece_que_estan_dejando_de_re.html#fn20)
G. Polyakov, A space 'Necklace' about the earth, (Kosmicheskoye
ozherel'ye zemli). Teknika Molodezhi, No. 4 41-43 (1977). (NASA
TM-75174).
